Add doc with token convention recommendations for VOs (SOFTWARE-5074) (#1021)
opensciencegrid/technology: docs/policy/collab-bearer-tokens.md

!!! attention "Token issuer uptime"
    Due to the centralized nature of bearer token validation, token issuers should be treated as critical, highly
    available services.
    Otherwise, a token issuer outage will result in OSG sites being unable to authenticate a collaboration's tokens.

Choose one of the token issuer types below, depending on the needs of your collaboration.

### Simple issuer ###

If your collaboration centrally administers all services requiring bearer tokens and your users do not need to directly
manage bearer tokens, consider running a simple token issuer.
A simple token issuer consists of a public/private certificate keypair where the private key is used to issue tokens
directly and the public certificate is made available through a web server.

For example, the OSPool (née OSG VO) serves its public certificate through
[GitHub pages](https://github.com/scitokens/osg-connect/) and uses the private key to sign tokens used for pilot job
submission as well as automatically generating tokens to accompany user jobs so that they can access their private

> storage areas.

Reviewer: What's a good place to put the private key? How is the private key used to issue tokens? What commands do you need to run? Linking to someone else's documentation would be fine here.

-   [WLCG tokens](https://github.com/WLCG-AuthZ-WG/common-jwt-profile/blob/master/profile.md)

Claims are further described below with recommendations to ensure the greatest compatibility with OSG sites.

### Scope ###

The `scope` claim is a space-separated list of authorizations that should be granted to the bearer.
Scopes utilized by OSG services include the following:

| **Capability**   | **SciTokens scope** | **WLCG scope**                                 |
|------------------|---------------------|------------------------------------------------|
| HTCondor `READ`  | `condor:/READ`      | `compute.read`                                 |
| HTCondor `WRITE` | `condor:/WRITE`     | `compute.modify compute.cancel compute.create` |
| XRootD read      | `read:<PATH>`       | `storage.read:<PATH>`                          |
| XRootD write     | `write:<PATH>`      | `storage.modify:<PATH>`                        |

Replacing `<PATH>` with a path to the storage location that the bearer should be authorized to access.

### Subject ###

Subjects should be unique, stable identifiers that correspond to a user or service (e.g. pilot job submission).

> In other words, subjects combined with a token issuer can be used for suspending access for a given collaboration user,
> user-level accounting, monitoring, auditing, or tracing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In other words, subjects combined with a token issuer can be used for 
user-level accounting, monitoring, auditing, tracing, or suspension of access.
```
putting 'banning people' first made it a bit scary.

Author: It's probably the most "interesting" use case, though

In tandem with a token issuer URL (i.e., the `iss` claim), subjects can be used by site HTCondor-CE or XRootD services
to map to a local identity.

!!! tip "Privacy considerations"
    Depending on your collaboration's userbase and contributing sites, you may have to take privacy concerns, such as
    the GDPR into account when assigning subjects to users.

>     Thus, it may be preferable to assign user a randomly-generated string as their `sub`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    In this case, ensure there is no personally identifiable information in the `sub` field
    by using a hash, UUID, or some other generated string.
```
I think it's helpful to tell them what to avoid, and to give them some examples on how to do it. Also I wanted to avoid using "random" because it doesn't have to be.

Author: There's a big discussion going on in the WLCG authZ mailing list and people seem to be landing on "randomly generated" as the ideal option

### Audience ###

To take advantage of the improved security posture of bearer tokens, we recommend that the `aud` claim be set to the
intended host.
For example, tokens used for submission to an HTCondor-CE should set the following:

```
aud = <CE FQDN>:<CE PORT>
```

### WLCG groups ###

!!! note

>     WLCG JWT-profile only

Reviewer: What does this sentence mean? What's a WLCG JWT-profile? If what you're trying to say is that it doesn't work with SciTokens, you're already saying that below.

a collaboration:

-   Users (both human and robots) would request that their collaboration sign their X.509 proxies
    (usually through a VOMS server),
-   Or in the case of automated services (i.e. pilot job submission) a collaboration could directly create and sign
    proxies themselves

Now, sites can authenticate and authorize clients presenting bearer tokens, such as SciTokens or WLCG tokens.
This document describes how collaborations can issue bearer tokens for the aforementioned use cases in ways that are
compatible with OSG sites.

Issuers
-------

To generate bearer tokens, a collaboration must adminster at least one "token issuer" to issue tokens to their users.
In addition to generating and signing tokens, token issuers provide a public endpoint that can be used to validate an
issued token,
e.g. an OSG Compute Entrypoint (CE) will contact the token issuer to authorize a bearer token used for pilot job
submission.

!!! attention "Token issuer uptime"
    Due to the centralized nature of bearer token validation, token issuers should be treated as critical, highly
    available services.

>     Otherwise, a token issuer outage will result in OSG sites being unable to authenticate a collaboration's tokens.

Reviewer: So every individual pilot and every authenticated file transfer will need to contact the token issuer, and if the issuer is down then neither pilots nor file transfers will work? (Do payloads need to contact the issuer?)

Author: > So every individual pilot and every authenticated file transfer will need to contact the token issuer, and if the issuer is down then neither pilots nor file transfers will work?

Correct, this is why ATLAS is holding back on moving all US CEs to 3.6

> (Do payloads need to contact the issuer?)

Nope, only services that authenticate tokens need to contact the issuer

Reviewer: You might want to spell that out (just so people know you're not kidding).

Author: I'm not sure how I can spell it out further than "tokens can't be authenticated if the issuer is down"?

Author: Good point, fixed

| Fermilab          | <https://github.com/opensciencegrid/topology/blob/master/virtual-organizations/Fermilab.yaml> |   |
| CHTC (née GLOW)   | <https://github.com/opensciencegrid/topology/blob/master/virtual-organizations/GLOW.yaml>     |   |
| Gluex             | <https://github.com/opensciencegrid/topology/blob/master/virtual-organizations/Gluex.yaml>    |   |
| IceCube           | <https://github.com/opensciencegrid/topology/blob/master/virtual-organizations/IceCube.yaml>  |   |
| LIGO              | <https://github.com/opensciencegrid/topology/blob/master/virtual-organizations/LIGO.yaml>     |   |
| Mu2e              | <https://github.com/opensciencegrid/topology/blob/master/virtual-organizations/Mu2e.yaml>     |   |
| OSPool            | <https://github.com/opensciencegrid/topology/blob/master/virtual-organizations/OSG.yaml>      |   |
| SBND              | <https://github.com/opensciencegrid/topology/blob/master/virtual-organizations/SBND.yaml>     |   |
| gm2               | <https://github.com/opensciencegrid/topology/blob/master/virtual-organizations/gm2.yaml>      |   |

> The OSG distributes the `osg-scitokens-mapfile` RPM package that includes default issuer and [subject](#subject)

Reviewer: I think one of the "default"s is redundant...

Author: Good catch
